hi everyone in this video I want to show
you how I grew lettuce in my kitchen
from seed to harvest in just five weeks
here you can see my harvest beautiful
healthy fresh lettuce for my salad I'm
very excited to eat these let me show
you how I grew these from seed I started
with this packet of seeds I ordered from
Amazon buttercrunch lettuce seeds these
cost me about $5 for 500 seeds I'm going
to grow this lettuce hydroponically that
means in water instead of in soil to get
started I plant these seeds in cubes of
rock well I got these on Amazon as well
the rockwool is used in hydroponics as
agro media instead of soil it is
actually made from molten rock that is
spun into cotton candy-like fibers and
then compressed into the cubes you see
here these cubes need to be soaked in
water first before planting the seeds
into them I have here a clear storage
container that filled with water the
rock will I'm using for the lettuce are
1 inch cubes I'm gonna soak 10 of them
to get the lettuce seed started here I
have them all soaked and lined up ready
for the seeds ok let's open the packet
of seeds there are 500 in here I decide
since there's so many seeds I'm going to
put 2 or 3 per hole just in case they
don't all germinate it turns out that
all the seeds germinated so in the
future I plan to put only one seed per
cube so that I don't have to trim out
the extra seedlings here on my finger
you can see how small the seeds are but
they are still big enough to handle
easily so I dropped 2 to 3 seeds in each
hole with the intention of thinning out
any extra seedlings that might grow and
only leaving one healthy plant per cube
now I have all the seeds in each of the
10 cubes and they are sitting in some
water to keep them moist some people
test the pH of the water I didn't find
that necessary although I have a test
kit it's too much of a bother and the
seeds seem to do fine with my tap water
lettuce likes water that is a pH of
between 6.0 and 6.5 if you find your
plants are not growing as expected then
you should probably check the pH of your
water and adjust
if it is not in the proper range so now
I have two or three seeds per cube and
enough water in the container to make
sure the Rock will stays moist now I put
a lid on the container it's a clear lid
so it will act as a humidity dome to
keep the moisture and the heat in sort
of like a mini greenhouse I keep the
container next to a bay window that is
facing Southwest where it should get
enough Sun okay today is Friday I
planted these on Tuesday and you can see
the seeds have germinated and I have
some little seedlings coming up I move
the containers so that it is under the
grow lights from my arrow garden and
also near the bay window so plenty of
light is reaching the lettuce plants you
can see they are in a very humid moist
environment the lid on this container
has quite a bit of condensation forming
let's take the lid off and have a closer
look we can see that more than one plant
is starting to grow in each cube so next
time I plant from this packet I'm going
to drop only one seed in each hole since
these are fresh seeds and they have a
high germination rate I must have
dropped some seeds in the water since
there are some sprouts growing in the
container outside of the rockwool cubes
but I don't know why but I decided to
pick up some of these out of the water
and put them back into the rockwool
cubes I guess I don't like wasting today
is Tuesday one week since I planted the
seeds the seedlings are growing
beautifully it looks like one of them
fell out
I'm not going to transfer these to the
mason jars until I see roots coming out
from the bottom let's take a look at one
of these and if we look at the bottom we
can see that there are no roots coming
out there are also no true leaves
growing yet the leaves we see here are
the first set of leaves that all
seedlings put out and usually are shaped
like the seed they come from but the
second set of leaves are shaped the way
the leaves on the plant will be and
that's why they're called true leaves I
think it's a good idea to wait until
that second set of true leaves appears
and when there are some roots coming out
of the rockwool cubes before
transplanting these seedlings it looks
like I'm going to have to do some
thinning since we really want only one
healthy plain
two per cube next time I plant these I'm
only gonna put one seed in each cube
since it looks like these seeds all
germinated if you have older seeds they
might not all germinate and then you
should put two to three in each cube
just to make sure you have at least one
plant coming or germinating out of each
cube
okay now the seedlings are about twelve
days old and they have roots coming out
from the bottom and have developed the
second set of leaves so they are ready
for transplanting I have my glass mason
jars set up here with netcups in each of
them already for the plants these are
the bigger quart jars with wide mouths
and I you I am using three-inch netcups
I'll use these and also here I have some
smaller ones with two inch net cups for
lettuce you don't need the larger jars
since the roots are not as extensive as
say a tomato plant so the reservoir for
the lettuce plant doesn't have to be as
big as for the tomato plant or a
cucumber plant I use the combination of
the two sizes since that is what I had
on hand as you can see here the two-inch
cup falls into the wide mouth of the
smaller mason jar so you need to use the
screw on top and once you put that on
the two-inch net cup fits into the hole
perfectly the 3-inch net cups fit into
the wide mouth perfectly with no need to
screw the top on I have here some
hydroponic solution I've already mixed
up this is called grow big from Fox
farms it's really easy to mix up just
put two teaspoons into a gallon
container I used my old milk containers
shake it up and it's good to go I also
mixed up some master blend formula with
which is a little more complicated
because it has three components to mix
together but I wanted to compare the two
to see if one yielded more lettuce than
the other for the lettuce plants I found
there was no difference between the two
solutions so now I prefer to use the
grow big formula for my lettuce plants
okay once you have mixed the hydroponic
solution you can go ahead and pour one
into each of the mason jars so here I am
pouring just until the bottom of the net
cups not to the top of the jar you want
keep the rockwool wet so it needs to
contact the water and the roots need to
reach down into the water as well but
the plant roots also need oxygen so you
need to have a gap for the plant to grow
what are called air roots so that they
can take in oxygen along with the water
and the nutrients in the water so once
all the jars are filled with water I
take each plant and place it into the
net cups the rockwool doesn't fill up
the entire space of the net cup so I use
hydroponic clay pebbles to fill in the
space around the rock wall these clay
pebbles are made as a grow media
specifically for hydroponics you can
find them on Amazon they help fill in
the gaps around the rock wall and they
also help to block out the light coming
from the top of the net cups into the
water the reason we want to block out
the light is because we don't want algae
growing in the water that's also the
reason I cover the mason jars with paper
to block out the light I do this one
cube at a time some of my rock wool
cubes have more than one lettuce
seedling growing in them so now is the
time to thin them out I thin them here
by pulling out the less healthy-looking
plants and leaving the bigger healthier
ones but really that's not the best way
to thin the plants as I pull out the
plants to thin them the roots tug at
each other since they're tangled
together this can result in damage to
the roots of the healthy plant the
better way to thin the seedlings is to
just take a pair of scissors and cut the
plant we don't want and take it away but
leave the roots in place I'm careful
enough when I thin out these plants so I
don't damage the roots and I also wanted
to take the thinned out plants and
replant those as well but the next time
I'm just going to use a scissor now I
place the thinned-out cubed into a net
cup and fill around it with hydroponic
clay pebbles and I continue with this
procedure for the rest of the plants I
line up all my mason jars and planters
to keep them stable on my shelves these
are LED lights I got from Amazon they
are rated 6500 Kelvin which is a part of
color spectrum that the lettuce likes
okay here you can see I covered all the
jars with paper to keep the light out of
the water and to prevent algae from
growing the seedlings are still only
about 15 days old at this point but they
look healthy here you can see the two
seedlings that I thinned out and I had
planted them originally in water in Solo
cups but now I put soil in the Solo cups
instead of using the hydroponic method
in the NDS grew but they didn't grow as
quickly and as robustly as the plants
that I grew hydroponically I'm curious
to see what the roots look like on these
plants let's take the paper sleeve off I
don't see any roots we'll check again in
a couple of days alright here we are at
day 20 and we can see some nice growth
on the lettuce plants let's take a look
at the roots and we can see they are
really growing okay now it is day 28 we
are at 4 weeks and the Leafs are really
getting much bigger now let's take a
look at the roots you can see really
nice healthy-looking roots and they are
nice and white
there isn't any algae growing that I can
see what is interesting is that as I
compare the smaller mason jars to the
bigger ones it looks to me like the
plants and the 32 ounce jars are growing
much bigger than the plants in the 16
ounce jars I don't know if that's just
random or if they are growing better
because there is more room for the roots
to grow okay it is week five and I'm
ready to harvest my crop of lettuce you
can see the plants have grown a bit more
the leaves look beautiful tender and
ready to eat when I lift the plant out
of the water you can see the roots still
look nice and healthy and they have
consumed most of the water in the jars
you can use a scissor or knife to
harvest but I'm plucking each leaf one
at a time off the plants by hand and I'm
getting a lot of enjoyment doing this
each leaf is just so beautiful I can't
wait to put this into my salad I tasted
one of the leaves it has a very mild
flavor and of
very tender texture this is remember the
butter crunch lettuce here you can see
the remains after I harvested my crop
there's not much left but I'm gonna
leave some of these to grow back you can
grow lettuce back again and again up to
three times before the leaves start to
turn bitter okay here we are just a week
later and you can see more leaves are
growing on these plants it's interesting
that the new leaves are coming in faster
than the original leaves the plant took
five weeks to grow to its maturity and
after harvesting them these leaves just
took a week to come back I also changed
out my grow lights I now have four
fluorescent bulbs instead of the two
grow lamps these are also 6500 Kelvin
which is more of a blue light than a red
light on the color spectrum I'm gonna
leave these plans for another week to
see how much they grow back okay here we
are at week seven two weeks ago at week
five I harvested this lettuce and left
only a few leaves on each plant and now
just two weeks later they've grown back
very nicely and I was surprised that it
only took two weeks for them to grow
back this one is in soil and it did not
grow back but the ones I'm growing
hydroponically came back very nicely
look at these big leaves I think they
are bigger than they were two weeks ago
when I harvested them the first time
it's amazing to me how beautifully
they've come back after the first
harvest and in just two weeks this is
really amazing the leaves feel a little
less tender than the first harvest they
feel a little thicker and a little more
ruffled not as soft as the leaves from
the first harvest which were much
smoother and more tender
they say that each time the leaves come
back they are a little more bitter and
that after three harvests they are too
bitter to use let's go ahead and harvest
these for the second time I have a glass
bowl prepared to put the leaves in and I
will not wash them until I'm ready to
use them in a salad if you wash them and
then store them wet they can rot more
quickly they will stay much fresher for
a longer period of time if you just
store them dry and eat
glass bowl like this or in a plastic bag
you can use the plastic produce bags you
get when you buy your vegetables at the
supermarket
I am harvesting these by hand one leaf
at a time mostly because I am really
literally enjoying the fruits of my
labor let's taste one of these leaves it
tastes really good it's not bitter it is
not as tender texturally as the first
harvest but it is definitely delicious
and a little more crunchy than the first
leaves I harvested two weeks ago let's
have a look at the roots on this plant
they are not as pristine and as white as
they were two weeks ago but they are
still alive and healthy looking and
drinking the water from the reservoir in
the mason jar let's take a look at this
next head of lettuce it's a beautiful
head of lettuce it also has a nice long
healthy root system after I remove the
sleeve we can see the water level is
pretty low so the plant has been
drinking up the nutrients in the water
okay let's go ahead and harvest the
leaves from this plant and the remaining
plants this plant is in one of the
smaller mason jars you can see the water
level is a bit low and the outer leaves
are wilted a bit so I'm not going to use
these outer leaves but the inner leaves
look nice and healthy and so I'm going
to harvest those here is another one of
the smaller mason jars again the outer
leaves are droopy and even a little
brown it could be they didn't get enough
water for some reason this only happens
to the plants and the smaller jars the
plants in the larger jars had much
healthier looking leaves my smaller jars
are sixteen ounce jars the bigger jars
are 32 ounces so I am tearing off the
outer leaves and I'm not using those and
then we'll leave the rest of the plant
to regrow so here we have a nice second
harvest from my lettuce plants and I'm
going to leave the plans to regrow for a
third harvest in the meantime I did
start some more plants here you can see
the seedlings start to grow
I'm growing the buttercrunch again but
I'm also growing two other varieties
these are from Burpee seeds I have green
ice and I have black seeded Simpson
lettuce so here are my plants after the
second harvest I left one plant mostly
intact but the rest of these I took
almost all the leaves off I'm gonna
leave them under the lights and see how
much of it grows back for the third
harvest in the meantime I have my second
harvest here a nice bowl of fresh
lettuce and I'm gonna go make myself a
salad I hope you enjoyed this video bye
for now